h1. named-admin 

named-admin is a command line tool for bind named.conf zone administration.

Reads, writes and sorts the file and finds, inserts, deletes and counts zones.
* zones can be inserted based on customizable zone templates
* the find action accepts wildcards (*) i.e. to find all zones of a certain domain
* zones will be alphabetically sorted within your configuration file after each manipulation
* option to automatically check the zone file syntax after manipulations with named-checkconf
* option to aks for a named service restart after changes on the named configuration

h2. Usage

Launch the main ruby script: <code>named-admin COMMAND [argument] [options]</code>

h3. Examples

* find all zones which begin with "example": <code>named-admin find example*</code>
* add a zone named "example.org": <code>named-admin add example.org</code>
* remove the zone "example.org", check the zone file but don't ask to restart named: <code>named-admin remove example.org --check --no-restart</code>

Check out <code>named-admin --help</code> for commands and options.

h2. Installation

* Download named-admin and move it to the desired application directory (i.e. /usr/local/share/named-admin)
* Create a symlink in order to have named-admin in your execution path
** <code>ln -s /usr/local/share/named-admin/named-admin.rb /usr/local/sbin/named-admin</code>
* Copy the two configuration files from the templates and adapt them to your needs:
** copy the base configuration file: <code>cp config/config.yml.dist config/config.yml</code>
** copy the zone templates file: <code>cp config/zones.yml.dist config/zones.yml</code>
* have fun and start using named-admin to simplify your daily named zone management!

h2. Configuration

h3. config/config.yml

* specify the default path to you named.conf bind configuration file
* activate automatic syntax checking with named-checkconf
* configure whether to ask for a named restart after configuration changes

*Example config.yml:*
<code>
#
# base configuration file for named-admin
#

# specify the location of the named.conf or
# the file which contains you named zone configurations
named_zone_file:   '/etc/named.conf'

# Define the command to execute in order to restart named
# and reload the configuration
restart_cmd:       'service named restart'
restart_enable:    true

# configuration of logging
log_enable:        true
log_file:          '/var/log/named-admin.log'

# settings for automatically testing the configuration with named-checkconf
checkconf_path:    '/usr/sbin/named-checkconf'
checkconf_enable:  false
</code>

h3. config/zones.yml

* define different zone templates which can be used by the "add zone" action

*Example zones.yml:*

<code>
# define your default zone settings
# {{name}} is replaced by the real zone name

example-slave:
    type: slave
    masters: '{ 192.168.1.1; 192.168.1.2; }'
    allow-query: '{ any; }'
    file: '"{{name}}.db"'

example-master:
    type: master
    also-notify: '{ 192.168.1.3; 192.168.1.4; }'
    allow-query: '{ none; }'
    file: '"{{name}}.db"'
</code>


h2. Credits

Copyright (C) 2009 Nik Wolfgramm, released under the MIT license
